2013.07.27/README.md, before:

# CoderDojo Ponce Springs 7/27/2013 Event Outline and Resources

Thanks for attending CoderDojo Ponce Springs -- a free and fun place where Atlanta's kids learn how to code, 
supported by mentors and parents! We hope you have a great time.

# Key Times

* 1:00 PM: Volunteers begin setting up
* 1:45 PM: Doors open, parents and students: please sign in at the sign in table
* 2:15 PM: Welcome and kickoff -- Workshop leaders will describe the workshops areas, and students will pick and get settled in
* 4:30 PM: Sessions wind up -- Workshop leaders seek feedback from the students about the session and ask them 
what they want to try next time
* 5:00 PM: Volunteers begin shutting down

# Info for Parents

## Getting here and parking

See [PARKING.md](../PARKING.md) for info on getting here and where to park -- **and where to avoid parking**!

## What to bring

* Bring a laptop for your child. We don't have any loaner laptops this time.
* We'll have soft drinks and water and a some snacks, but if you'd like to bring some other snacks to share, 
that would be great.

# Info for Students

## Special Reminder

Students, remember that the dojo is partly a classroom, but mostly a **playground**. Ultimately, you get to decide 
what programming languages, tools, and ideas you want to explore, learn, and play with. 
And, all of us: mentors, other students, and parents are here to help you learn and have fun.

We want you to feel free to pursue what is interesting to you. You can always ask a mentor about things that 
interest you, or any other questions you have.

We even have a special **Any Question Any Time** area where you can come to ask questions that might be 
totally different from what is happening in the workshop areas. Or, you can come there with your laptop and 
just work on whatever you want to and get help from mentors or other students.

## When you arrive

We'll have have multiple work areas, some set up as workshops broken down for different student skill 
levels, and another one called **Any Question Any Time** for you to talk with mentors about anything you want.

## What's your current experience with coding?

If you want to start with one of the workshops, see where you fit against these descriptions:

* **Beginner level**: You are totally new or have little exposure to programming and / or web development

* **Intermediate level**: You have some experience with coding, but want to dig into concepts like game development, 
object-oriented programming, events, and web programming

* **Advanced level**: You have already been programming for a while and have your own project that you'd like to 
discuss with other students or mentors that can help you go further

# Workshop Sessions Summaries

Each session will begin around 2:15, so pick one of these by then. You don't have to stick with the same 
session the whole time, and we'll be repeating them at least for a few more sessions.

* For **beginner level** students:

  * **Workshop A-1:** Create a fun Tic-Tac-Toe game and learn HTML and CSS basics
  
  `or`
  
  * **Workshop A-2:** Build your own web site and expand your HTML and CSS skills
  
  `or`

  * **Workshop B-1:** Create fun animations and geometric shapes with Python
  
  `or`

  * **Workshop B-2:** Recieve an introduction to the Scratch programming language created by MIT.  Documentation on what the introduction will cover [can be found here](https://github.com/versionone/CoderDojo-ScratchDemo/blob/master/README.md).

* For **intermediate level** students:

  * **Workshop C:** Build the classic arcade game Pong in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
  
  `or`

  * **Workshop D:** Make battling JavaScript robots!

## Any Question Any Time area

* If you have other questions or goals that don't fit into any of the workshops, or who are at an **advanced level**
, come over to the **Any Question Any Time**. You can ask any question you want to mentors or other students, and you
can even bring your laptop and just hang out and work on your own projects. It's up to you.

**Note:** *We'll continue to offer the same sessions for a while, and you can always drop in and out of a session 
any time you like.*

# Workshop Sessions Details

**Note:** The beginner's `Python Turtle` session requires special software to download ahead of time. And, if you 
want to start creating a web page on your laptop that you can save for later, we recommend you download 
[Sublime Text 2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2).

# Beginner level workshops

For students of any age that are totally new or have little exposure to programming and / or web development.

## Workshop A-1: Create a fun Tic-Tac-Toe game and learn HTML and CSS basics

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

For building the Tic Tac Toe game, we recommend you download 
[Sublime Text 2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2). We will also use an online HTML Chat tool that lets you experiment with HTML easily
and share code with your friends.

### What you’ll learn

Learn how to use foundational Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) tags and Cascasing Style Sheets (CSS) while
creating a simple and fun Tic-Tac-Toe game that you can play against your friends.

### Starting URL

* Tic-Tac-Toe game (finished version): http://goo.gl/Hdtph2
* Tic-Tac-Toe tutorial: TODO
* HTML Chat Tool with Login, Favorites, "Riff" feature: http://goo.gl/iTwbg

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

There are lots more HTML tags that can be used for creating all kinds of cool pages. Here are some places to learn more:

* W3 Schools provides a good reference of HTML tags: http://www.w3schools.com
* Code Avengers 3-Level HTML adventure learning: http://www.codeavengers.com/ (You can also learn JavaScript for apps and games!)

## Workshop A-2: Build your own web site and expand your HTML and CSS skills


For students of any age that have done Workshop A, and would like to create a website that they can save on their
laptop or publish online for friends and family to see.

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

We recommend you download and install the free [Sublime Text 2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2) editor.

### What you’ll learn

Learn how to take what you learned in Workshop A, (HTML and CSS), to build your own web site that you can save
on your laptop and/or publish online. 
The second session will cover

* interactions between multiple pages
* tabs and other layouts with Bootstrap
* mouse rollover animations

### Starting URL

http://jsbin.com/epahim/latest

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Creating your own web page is really just the beginning of what you can do on the web! Try these out:

* Mozilla’s Popcorn Maker: mash up YouTube videos, SoundCloud, or HTMl5 content into fun videos and collages: https://popcorn.webmaker.org/editor/ 
* Code Avengers 3-Level HTML adventure learning: http://www.codeavengers.com/ (You can also learn JavaScript for apps and games!)
* HTMl5 Rocks web site with lots of tutorials: http://www.html5rocks.com/en/tutorials 

## Workshop B-1: Create fun animations and geometric shapes with Python

TODO: Alex to edit

You can find the complete instructions and lesson plan [here](pygame/README.md).

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

For this workshop you will need Python installed on your computer.  We will be using the latest version of Python, which is 3.3.2.  However, if you already happened to have an older version of Python installed on your computer, it will work just fine.

* **Windows**
  * Download and install Python for Windows at http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.5/python-2.7.5.msi
  * Download and install PyScripter at https://code.google.com/p/pyscripter/downloads/detail?name=PyScripter-v2.5.3-Setup.exe
  * Download and install the `pygame` library at http://pygame.org/ftp/pygame-1.9.1.win32-py2.7.msi

* **Mac**
  * If you have a Mac, it already has Python pre-installed.
  * Download and install the `pygame` library for your version of Mac OSX here: http://www.pygame.org/download.shtml

### What you’ll learn

Use the popular and fun Python programming language to create a simple game.

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Now that you know the basics, you’re ready to become an expert. Here are some resources for going deeper:

* Learn Python online through an interactive step-by-step tutorial (without any download) at http://www.learnpython.org/
* Feeling like a challenge? Try http://learnpythonthehardway.org/! Just kidding, it's actually quite an easy way to learn Python, a really good way to start if you're new to programming.
* Tons of more learning resources for Python here: http://wiki.python.org/moin/BeginnersGuide/Programmers
* The docummentatition and tutorials for the `pygame` library can be found here: http://www.pygame.org/docs/, there are also tons of pygame games available for download.

## Workshop B-2: Create a game with Scratch

TODO: Greg to edit


# Intermediate level workshops

For students who have some experience with coding, but want to dig into concepts like game development, object-oriented programming, events, and web programming.

## Workshop C: Build the classic arcade game Pong in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript

TODO: James to edit

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

No installation required. We’ll be using the free http://www.codepen.io, which allows you to author code and save it for sharing with others.

### What you’ll learn

Learn how to use HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to create the classic arcade game Pong. You’ll learn about animation, using object-orientation in JavaScript, and gaming concepts like collision detection.

### Starting URL:

http://goo.gl/kjX3Z

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Pong is an arcade classic, no doubt. But, maybe you want to recreate some of the other classic games? Or, do you want to learn more about animation, 3D, etc? Try some of these:

* HTML5 Game Development course at Udacity taught by a Google Chrome engineer: https://www.udacity.com/course/cs255 
* Lots of resources for building HTML5 games: http://www.html5gamedevelopment.com/html5-engines 
* Great collection of HTML5 games tutorials and tools: http://html5games.com/resources/ 

## Workshop D: Make battling JavaScript robots!

TODO: Jim to edit

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

No installation required. We’ll be using the free site http://fightcodegame.com/. This site requires that you have
an account with [http://www.github.com](http://www.github.com) first. GitHub requires that you be at least 
13-years-old, so if you're younger, make sure your parents approve or create the account for you.

You can study the documentation here: http://fightcodegame.com/docs/.

### What you’ll learn

Create virtual robots that battle each other head to head and rack up points while learning more about 
programming JavaScript with functions, object-orientation and inheritance, events, and more.
  
### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Fighting robots are popular in other languages too, but so are real, physical robots. Here are some resources:

* Robocode: develop robot battle tanks to fight each other: http://robocode.sourceforge.net/ (This is what FightCodeGame.com is based on)
* Lego Mindstorms: write code to make *real* robots move and do all kinds of things: http://mindstorms.lego.com/en-us/default.aspx
* Arduino is an open-source electronics platform intended for artists, designers, hobbyists, and anyone interested in creating interactive objects and environments: http://www.arduino.cc/ 

# Any Question Any Time area

* Are you interested in learning something that we don't yet have a workshop about?
* Or, have you been building something on your own or with friends that you'd like some help with?
* Or, are you mostly interested in subjects that you're not sure how coding might fit in with?

If you're been writing code for a while and already have projects you're working on and goals for 
problems you're trying to solve, we want to hear about it! We'll do our best to help you or find you
the help you need!

You can even help us set the goals for future workshops and events!

## Resources for learning more on your own or with friends

The number of web sites and training materials are almost endless for advanced programming. See what you can find
on these:

* GitHub is a home for your code, and a place to help other people code: [http://www.github.com](http://www.github.com)
* Google Developers site has tons of info and downloads for writing code with Google's many tools and APIs:
[https://developers.google.com/](https://developers.google.com/)
* Channel9 is Microsoft's social site for developers with lots of resources, videos, competitions: 
[http://channel9.msdn.com/](http://channel9.msdn.com/)
* Khan Academy Computer Science site with lots of videos and instructional materials, tutorials: [https://www.khanacademy.org/cs]
(https://www.khanacademy.org/cs)

What resources do you know of? Share them with us and the rest of the dojo!

Commit message:

Update readme with scratch info.

2013.07.27/README.md, after:

# CoderDojo Ponce Springs 7/27/2013 Event Outline and Resources

Thanks for attending CoderDojo Ponce Springs -- a free and fun place where Atlanta's kids learn how to code, 
supported by mentors and parents! We hope you have a great time.

# Key Times

* 1:00 PM: Volunteers begin setting up
* 1:45 PM: Doors open, parents and students: please sign in at the sign in table
* 2:15 PM: Welcome and kickoff -- Workshop leaders will describe the workshops areas, and students will pick and get settled in
* 4:30 PM: Sessions wind up -- Workshop leaders seek feedback from the students about the session and ask them 
what they want to try next time
* 5:00 PM: Volunteers begin shutting down

# Info for Parents

## Getting here and parking

See [PARKING.md](../PARKING.md) for info on getting here and where to park -- **and where to avoid parking**!

## What to bring

* Bring a laptop for your child. We don't have any loaner laptops this time.
* We'll have soft drinks and water and a some snacks, but if you'd like to bring some other snacks to share, 
that would be great.

# Info for Students

## Special Reminder

Students, remember that the dojo is partly a classroom, but mostly a **playground**. Ultimately, you get to decide 
what programming languages, tools, and ideas you want to explore, learn, and play with. 
And, all of us: mentors, other students, and parents are here to help you learn and have fun.

We want you to feel free to pursue what is interesting to you. You can always ask a mentor about things that 
interest you, or any other questions you have.

We even have a special **Any Question Any Time** area where you can come to ask questions that might be 
totally different from what is happening in the workshop areas. Or, you can come there with your laptop and 
just work on whatever you want to and get help from mentors or other students.

## When you arrive

We'll have have multiple work areas, some set up as workshops broken down for different student skill 
levels, and another one called **Any Question Any Time** for you to talk with mentors about anything you want.

## What's your current experience with coding?

If you want to start with one of the workshops, see where you fit against these descriptions:

* **Beginner level**: You are totally new or have little exposure to programming and / or web development

* **Intermediate level**: You have some experience with coding, but want to dig into concepts like game development, 
object-oriented programming, events, and web programming

* **Advanced level**: You have already been programming for a while and have your own project that you'd like to 
discuss with other students or mentors that can help you go further

# Workshop Sessions Summaries

Each session will begin around 2:15, so pick one of these by then. You don't have to stick with the same 
session the whole time, and we'll be repeating them at least for a few more sessions.

* For **beginner level** students:

  * **Workshop A-1:** Create a fun Tic-Tac-Toe game and learn HTML and CSS basics
  
  `or`
  
  * **Workshop A-2:** Build your own web site and expand your HTML and CSS skills
  
  `or`

  * **Workshop B-1:** Create fun animations and geometric shapes with Python
  
  `or`

  * **Workshop B-2:** Recieve an introduction to the Scratch programming language created by MIT.  Documentation on what the introduction will cover [can be found here](https://github.com/versionone/CoderDojo-ScratchDemo/blob/master/README.md).

* For **intermediate level** students:

  * **Workshop C:** Build the classic arcade game Pong in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
  
  `or`

  * **Workshop D:** Make battling JavaScript robots!

## Any Question Any Time area

* If you have other questions or goals that don't fit into any of the workshops, or who are at an **advanced level**
, come over to the **Any Question Any Time**. You can ask any question you want to mentors or other students, and you
can even bring your laptop and just hang out and work on your own projects. It's up to you.

**Note:** *We'll continue to offer the same sessions for a while, and you can always drop in and out of a session 
any time you like.*

# Workshop Sessions Details

**Note:** The beginner's `Python Turtle` session requires special software to download ahead of time. And, if you 
want to start creating a web page on your laptop that you can save for later, we recommend you download 
[Sublime Text 2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2).

# Beginner level workshops

For students of any age that are totally new or have little exposure to programming and / or web development.

## Workshop A-1: Create a fun Tic-Tac-Toe game and learn HTML and CSS basics

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

For building the Tic Tac Toe game, we recommend you download 
[Sublime Text 2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2). We will also use an online HTML Chat tool that lets you experiment with HTML easily
and share code with your friends.

### What you’ll learn

Learn how to use foundational Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) tags and Cascasing Style Sheets (CSS) while
creating a simple and fun Tic-Tac-Toe game that you can play against your friends.

### Starting URL

* Tic-Tac-Toe game (finished version): http://goo.gl/Hdtph2
* Tic-Tac-Toe tutorial: TODO
* HTML Chat Tool with Login, Favorites, "Riff" feature: http://goo.gl/iTwbg

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

There are lots more HTML tags that can be used for creating all kinds of cool pages. Here are some places to learn more:

* W3 Schools provides a good reference of HTML tags: http://www.w3schools.com
* Code Avengers 3-Level HTML adventure learning: http://www.codeavengers.com/ (You can also learn JavaScript for apps and games!)

## Workshop A-2: Build your own web site and expand your HTML and CSS skills


For students of any age that have done Workshop A, and would like to create a website that they can save on their
laptop or publish online for friends and family to see.

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

We recommend you download and install the free [Sublime Text 2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2) editor.

### What you’ll learn

Learn how to take what you learned in Workshop A, (HTML and CSS), to build your own web site that you can save
on your laptop and/or publish online. 
The second session will cover

* interactions between multiple pages
* tabs and other layouts with Bootstrap
* mouse rollover animations

### Starting URL

http://jsbin.com/epahim/latest

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Creating your own web page is really just the beginning of what you can do on the web! Try these out:

* Mozilla’s Popcorn Maker: mash up YouTube videos, SoundCloud, or HTMl5 content into fun videos and collages: https://popcorn.webmaker.org/editor/ 
* Code Avengers 3-Level HTML adventure learning: http://www.codeavengers.com/ (You can also learn JavaScript for apps and games!)
* HTMl5 Rocks web site with lots of tutorials: http://www.html5rocks.com/en/tutorials 

## Workshop B-1: Create fun animations and geometric shapes with Python

TODO: Alex to edit

You can find the complete instructions and lesson plan [here](pygame/README.md).

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

For this workshop you will need Python installed on your computer.  We will be using the latest version of Python, which is 3.3.2.  However, if you already happened to have an older version of Python installed on your computer, it will work just fine.

* **Windows**
  * Download and install Python for Windows at http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.5/python-2.7.5.msi
  * Download and install PyScripter at https://code.google.com/p/pyscripter/downloads/detail?name=PyScripter-v2.5.3-Setup.exe
  * Download and install the `pygame` library at http://pygame.org/ftp/pygame-1.9.1.win32-py2.7.msi

* **Mac**
  * If you have a Mac, it already has Python pre-installed.
  * Download and install the `pygame` library for your version of Mac OSX here: http://www.pygame.org/download.shtml

### What you’ll learn

Use the popular and fun Python programming language to create a simple game.

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Now that you know the basics, you’re ready to become an expert. Here are some resources for going deeper:

* Learn Python online through an interactive step-by-step tutorial (without any download) at http://www.learnpython.org/
* Feeling like a challenge? Try http://learnpythonthehardway.org/! Just kidding, it's actually quite an easy way to learn Python, a really good way to start if you're new to programming.
* Tons of more learning resources for Python here: http://wiki.python.org/moin/BeginnersGuide/Programmers
* The docummentatition and tutorials for the `pygame` library can be found here: http://www.pygame.org/docs/, there are also tons of pygame games available for download.

## Workshop B-2: Create a game with Scratch

<h1>Getting Started With Scratch</h1>

<h3>What is Scratch, anyway?</h3>

Scratch is a beginner friendly <b>programming language</b> that allows you to create your own <b>games, music, art, and/or animations</b>.  You can create powerful programs by editing your code directly in a web browser, or, you can download the Scratch editor to your own computer at home.  Either way, the programs you create are shareable with your friends and family.  Show people what you create!

<h3>What can I build with the Scratch programming language?</h3>
You're really only limited by your imagination.  Though, as you become a better programmer, you may find yourself seeking more challenge.  There are plenty of programming languages out there.  Do some research first.  If nothing jumps out that interests you immediatey, try learning JavaScript or C#.  

The purpose today is to get you familiar with the Scratch programming language and the basics of most any programming language so that you can build anything you want.  We'll start simply by making a cat dance on the moon.  No really, it's simple!  From there, you will be able to start creating anything you want and come up with your own ideas.

<h3>Let's Create An Account</h3>
The first thing we'll do is a make a cat dance on the moon.  From there you can build whatever you want, but, to get started we'll first need to [go here](http://scratch.mit.edu/).

1.  Create a new account by going to [http://scratch.mit.edu](http://scratch.mit.edu).  
2.  Click on the 'Join Scratch' button in the top right corner of the screen.
2.  Choose a user name & password.  Make a note of this information so you don't forget it.
3.  Enter your birthday, gender, country and email address.
4.  Close the next window.

Your account is created and you can now use your account to create projects, ask for help on the website if you need it, browse projects other people have created, and upload your own creations to share with others.

A copy of the tutorial we will follow first can be [downloaded here](http://scratch.mit.edu/scratchr2/static/__1374511755__//pdfs/help/Getting-Started-Guide-Scratch2.pdf).  However, it's not necessary to do that right now since we will be using a slightly different method of introduction as described below.

<h3>Let's Learn How To Write A Scratch Program</h3>

First, let's follow the onscreen tutorial by clicking on the small question mark symbol below the "See Project Page" blue button in the upper right hand side of the screen.  The question mark is small and hard to see but it's there!

Next, click the 'Step-by-step Intro' blue link in the flyout window that opened.  This will take you to the step 1 of our introductory tutorial.


# Intermediate level workshops

For students who have some experience with coding, but want to dig into concepts like game development, object-oriented programming, events, and web programming.

## Workshop C: Build the classic arcade game Pong in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript

TODO: James to edit

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

No installation required. We’ll be using the free http://www.codepen.io, which allows you to author code and save it for sharing with others.

### What you’ll learn

Learn how to use HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to create the classic arcade game Pong. You’ll learn about animation, using object-orientation in JavaScript, and gaming concepts like collision detection.

### Starting URL:

http://goo.gl/kjX3Z

### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Pong is an arcade classic, no doubt. But, maybe you want to recreate some of the other classic games? Or, do you want to learn more about animation, 3D, etc? Try some of these:

* HTML5 Game Development course at Udacity taught by a Google Chrome engineer: https://www.udacity.com/course/cs255 
* Lots of resources for building HTML5 games: http://www.html5gamedevelopment.com/html5-engines 
* Great collection of HTML5 games tutorials and tools: http://html5games.com/resources/ 

## Workshop D: Make battling JavaScript robots!

TODO: Jim to edit

### Software to install on your laptop before you attend

No installation required. We’ll be using the free site http://fightcodegame.com/. This site requires that you have
an account with [http://www.github.com](http://www.github.com) first. GitHub requires that you be at least 
13-years-old, so if you're younger, make sure your parents approve or create the account for you.

You can study the documentation here: http://fightcodegame.com/docs/.

### What you’ll learn

Create virtual robots that battle each other head to head and rack up points while learning more about 
programming JavaScript with functions, object-orientation and inheritance, events, and more.
  
### Resources for going further after this tutorial

Fighting robots are popular in other languages too, but so are real, physical robots. Here are some resources:

* Robocode: develop robot battle tanks to fight each other: http://robocode.sourceforge.net/ (This is what FightCodeGame.com is based on)
* Lego Mindstorms: write code to make *real* robots move and do all kinds of things: http://mindstorms.lego.com/en-us/default.aspx
* Arduino is an open-source electronics platform intended for artists, designers, hobbyists, and anyone interested in creating interactive objects and environments: http://www.arduino.cc/ 

# Any Question Any Time area

* Are you interested in learning something that we don't yet have a workshop about?
* Or, have you been building something on your own or with friends that you'd like some help with?
* Or, are you mostly interested in subjects that you're not sure how coding might fit in with?

If you're been writing code for a while and already have projects you're working on and goals for 
problems you're trying to solve, we want to hear about it! We'll do our best to help you or find you
the help you need!

You can even help us set the goals for future workshops and events!

## Resources for learning more on your own or with friends

The number of web sites and training materials are almost endless for advanced programming. See what you can find
on these:

* GitHub is a home for your code, and a place to help other people code: [http://www.github.com](http://www.github.com)
* Google Developers site has tons of info and downloads for writing code with Google's many tools and APIs:
[https://developers.google.com/](https://developers.google.com/)
* Channel9 is Microsoft's social site for developers with lots of resources, videos, competitions: 
[http://channel9.msdn.com/](http://channel9.msdn.com/)
* Khan Academy Computer Science site with lots of videos and instructional materials, tutorials: [https://www.khanacademy.org/cs]
(https://www.khanacademy.org/cs)

What resources do you know of? Share them with us and the rest of the dojo!
